---
layout: post
title:  "First grant proposal"
date:   2018-04-16 15:30:00 +0100
categories: jekyll update
---

I just submitted a proposal for a Formas mobility grant. This is my first ever grant proposal, so it's a big step forward for me. If successful this would give me 3 years of postdoctoral funding, including 18 months on a visiting position in Bristol, and 18 months in Stockholm. Developing a thorough research plan for 3 years is a great exercise, and one that definitely does not come naturally to me. It's very different to writing a paper, because you don't have any results yet, and it's about anticipating what will be a breakthrough in the future, and creating an exciting path towards discovery. 

It takes a very different mindset. You have to follow your intuition to come up with an original idea. You have to convince yourself that your idea is really great and it's really worth doing. Which is tricky if you tend to practice self-criticism, which is an important part of science in its own right. You have to put a lot of effort into writing a draft and then seeking lots of external feedback, because let's face it, the first draft of anything always kind of sucks. And then you have to exercise judgment, as you get lots of constructive criticism, some of it going in contrary directions, and pull it all together into a polished argument. 

But it's actually really cool to design your own research programme. You really do get to decide what's the best avenue to pursue your next big breakthrough. And once you embark upon writing a proposal, it makes you a lot more open to picking up new suggestions and innovative ideas, whether it be from colleagues, friends or conferences. So whether the proposal succeeds or not, the act of writing one is a great way to focus your mind on what is the best thing to do next in your research.