---
layout: post
title: "Working Deeply"
date: 2018-08-13 13:20:00
categories: blog issues
---
Over the weekend I read a book by Cal Newport called Deep Work. I was inspired to read it after seeing his excellent article in the New York Times about [quitting social media](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/jobs/quit-social-media-your-career-may-depend-on-it.html).  Newport coins the term "deep work" to describe tasks that require highly focused, uninterrupted attention for long periods of time. This kind of work produces things that are *rare and valuable*. Deep work typically requires expert knowledge that takes years to fully develop, and therefore can't be replicated easily by someone else. He contrasts this with *shallow work*, which describes tasks that are of a networking or logistical nature, that can be performed while somewhat distracted, and are easy to replicate. 

It must be said, this book is of the personal development variety, and therefore must be read with a healthy dose of detachment and skepticism. That said, Deep Work was an illuminating read and contained many suggestions that I want to try. For example:

1. **Time blocking:** Draw on a piece of lined paper the hours in your forthcoming work day, separated into half hour blocks, and actively plan what you will do with half-hour of your day. That forces you to think carefully about what you ought to be spending your time on, and develop a realistic idea of how long a given task will actually take. Revise and re-plan as much as necessary, but the idea is that creating a plan is a lot better than having no plan.

2. **Do email / internet in planned chunks:** Set aside clear blocks of time in which you will process your emails. This might be once an hour for 10 minutes, or it might be twice a day for 20-30 minutes. Or if promptly responding to emails is a high proirity, you could do it more frequently. But the key is to limit it to discrete blocks and be strict about those blocks. That way you create time for more important work outside those blocks.

3. **Create a deep work routine:** Newport cites many examples of successful authors or researchers who have a set block of time (e.g. 2-3 hours at the beginning of each work day) for doing deep work. The idea is to train yourself into having a set period and environment where you work at your most intense concentration. He also stresses that most people have a deep work limit of around 4 hours per day. Outside of that, you're simply too tired and can't sustain it. So structure your day to enable those hours so they don't get eaten my distractions.

4. **Quit social media:** This one is controversial and plenty of my friends don't agree on this. The reasons are straightforward: social media is addictive, fragments your attention and actively damages your ability to think deeply. So it's detrimental to doing research, and therefore does harm to me professionally. We can easily identify what we gain from social media, such as connections with people far away, getting in touch with old friends, hearing about good stories, etc. But using social media often does insidious damage to our concentration skills, and actually doesn't help us to make *close friendships*. Close friendships are built upon spending time together in person, and making an effort for one another. Social media requires negligible effort, hence it really only builds networks of *loose acquaintances*. 

5. **Enforce strict limits to your work time:** This is also a bold suggestion to anyone in academia, as it goes against the engrained culture of *going the extra mile* (workaholism). But he argues quite effectively that limiting one's work time to reasonable hours (i.e. 8 hours a day) can increase your productivity, because it forces you to spend your time wisely. Having adequate rest also means you return to work with energy and a fresh mind, rather than being jaded and exhausted on a regular basis. It also forces you to work with *intensity and focus*, rather than slowly and distractedly. I like this philosophy and I want to follow it as best I can. 

One thing I didn't like about the book was that Newport slipped in to bragging a little too often about how successful he is. This is an annoying but very common feature of personal development books. It's like: I need to prove to you that my ideas will change your life for the better so I'm going to tell you how awesome I am. I find myself questioning whether his claims are too good to be true. But objectively, his track record as a researcher is fantastic, he has published 5 books already in a young career, and he claims not to work overtime. So I will forgive him his overconfidence if his methods actually end up helping me. But I know that at some level, what truly works for me will always be a little different to what I've read in a book like this.