---
layout: post
title: Growing out of impostor syndrome
date: 2018-04-16 17:00:00 +0100
categories: blog issues
---
As a researcher in a fiercely competitive academic environment, you hear a lot of discussion about impostor syndrome. This is a mindset where success makes you feel like a fake. It's when your internal belief system tells you that you are not worthy of your position, and sooner or later your colleagues and the world will realise that you are not up to the job. In many cases it leads to self-sabotage. Like not grabbing opportunities or applying for jobs and grants because you believe yourself to be inferior. 

I have read a number of articles about impostor syndrome in journals like Nature and Science, as well as science blogs. I must admit, for a long time I didn't really connect with them. I certainly had issues of self-doubt from time to time, but the articles I read didn't strike me as being terribly useful. It wasn't that I had nothing in common with the 'impostors', it was just that I didn't see what I could gain from reading these stories. There seemed to be a fatalism about the way people described impostor syndrome. It was like: "I suffer from self-doubt and impostor feelings, it's always been like this, it's problematic for my career, etc." The only solace to be found was that many people suffer this way, so it normalizes the feeling and the suffering. That's a worthy message, but I couldn't see how it was going to help me. 

But then I read [this blog by a therapist, Beth Rogerson](https://bethrogerson.com/tag/imposter-syndrome/). And for the first time I realised that there are in fact ways of overcoming it. This became much more interesting to me once I could actually see ways of not just 'suffering together' with other impostors, but really overcoming it. Having an action plan also made it easier for me to admit to myself that I did in fact suffer from impostor syndrome! (Side note: I really do!)

The surprising news to me was a simple difference in mindset that separated impostors from non-impostors. They had a different view of intelligence. To paraphrase from Beth Rogerson's blog:
- Impostors saw *intelligence as fixed*. They focused on performance goals, and saw success or failure on a task as a test of their intelligence.
- Non-impostors saw intelligence as *something that could grow*. That meant that both success and failure can be viewed as a learning exercise. 

It struck me that this is an incredibly simple change in perspective. It's so simple that it seems like it shouldn't even matter. But when you think about it, it makes a lot of sense. If you feel like your intelligence is fixed, that you'll never be any smarter than you are now, then a failure will seem like an insurmountable barrier (if you aren't smart enough now, then you'll never be). If you think your intelligence can grow, then even if you really suck at something now, you may one day be able to master it. 

It's actually a really exciting idea to think that I could be more intelligent when I'm 40 or 50 than when I was 25 or 30. This certainly runs counter to what I believed. I learned at school that your brain power is strongest when you're young, peaks at about 25 and then slowly wanes. I thought that getting older would bring more experience and knowledge, but not intelligence. But if it's true, and we can all get smarter as we get older... That would be really cool. 
